When I was reflecting on the work I did on Cornell Data Science this past year, I thought it might be interesting to look back even further and write a post about the first project I did for CDS. I feel like doing a post-mortem (or to put it less morbidly, debriefing) for the project could yield some interesting lessons both on the technical side and on the teamwork/organization side.

As a bit of background, this was the first semester of existence for my subteam on CDS. With my only machine learning background being from a single upper-div course, I wouldn't have been a good fit for CDS normally; but this subteam had a different focus and I was brought onboard because of my experience with data visualization. I had expected to be mentored by more experienced members on the team, but due to the demographics of the new subteam (all the members were new and most of them were freshmen) I ended up being one of the older and more experienced members.

The project was called "Social Tribes", and as expected of a proposal made by a freshman, its goal was far too broad and ambitious: "to detect and visualize echo chambers in social media". Needless to say, the scope was soon reduced to "clustering political journalists on Twitter". The team was myself, three freshmen, and one senior who had some experience with data visualization. 

We ended up scraping lists of Twitter followers from some 400 political journalists and creating a pairwise similarity metric based on number of overlapping followers which we hoped would represent the overlap in their audiences. Then, we applied some simple unsupervised clustering algorithms to the data and created some visualizations based on the projections. The cluster quality was quite poor and the results were mostly inconclusive, although the clusters we did find seemed to be split more along the lines of famous commentators vs regular journalists.

Looking back at our combined technical background, our odds of succeeding were not good; most of the freshmen had no experience with any sort of ML, and the senior turned out to be good for waving his hands and talking a lot at meetings but not for much else. He ended up making the slide decks for our various presentations but otherwise didn't contribute anything meaningful. For my part, I tried my best to read textbooks and literature for modeling and visualization techniques we could use for the project, but implementing meaningful things was challenging because of our combined inexperience with Python ML frameworks.

From the start, the team suffered from a lack of leadership. There were three potential managers for this project: the senior (because he was the oldest), myself (because I had the most experience), and the freshman who created the project proposal. It was unreasonable to expect a freshman to effectively lead a team, but I was also reluctant to take charge because I didn't want to step on people's toes and be accused of hijacking the project. In the end, no one filled that role, and I believe that this negatively impacted the team's productivity and sense of direction. I sometimes wonder if this project would have turned out better if I had taken charge, but I don't know if it would have made a difference. What I do know is that a successful technical project needs a project manager.





