---
layout: post
title: "Cornell's Contributions to Ithaca"
date: 2019-05-13
---

Several months ago, there was a lot of attention around Amazon's decision to cancel plans to build a second headquarters in NYC due to the vehement opposition of a vocal minority. Much of the discussion centered on the tax breaks that Amazon would receive, and the benefits that Amazon would bring to the city. Naturally, this reminded me of a similar debate that was playing out in college towns across America - how much should universities like Cornell be expected to contribute to their surrounding communities?

Cornell’s impact on Ithaca has many similarities with the expected impact of Amazon to NYC, although the effects are probably more pronounced in Ithaca since it is much smaller than NYC. Amazon was expected to bring 25,000 high-paying jobs to NYC and spur economic growth in Long Island with its proposed headquarters. In comparison, Cornell directly employs 10,132 people, of which 7,324 are in non-academic roles. Many of those are Nonetheless, as Ithaca's largest employer, Cornell has undoubtedly contributed massively to the economic development of Ithaca. According to Carol Kammen,  "in 2001 Cornell University accounted for 23% of the economy in \[Tompkins\] county, and approx. 50% of the money that comes into the local economy from outside." 

Many of the negative effects appear to be similar as well. Activists feared that Amazon’s headquarters would decrease the availability of affordable housing, contribute to congestion, and place additional strain on infrastructure. Although congestion isn’t a huge problem in Ithaca, the soaring rent in collegetown, lack of parking on campus, and the state of disrepair of Ithaca’s roads is remarkably similar to the situation in communities surrounding other universities and large companies around the country.

Perhaps the biggest difference between Amazon and Cornell is their tax status. As a for-profit company, Amazon is required to pay taxes, but would have received a $3 billion tax break for its new expansion. This was decidedly unpopular with a lot of city residents, as many people believe that such a wealthy company should not be given any tax breaks. In contrast, as a non-profit, Cornell pays no property taxes. Instead, Cornell makes a voluntary annual contribution to Ithaca - in total, Cornell owns around $2.1 billion in tax-exempt property in Ithaca and paid $1.3 million in voluntary contributions to Ithaca in FY 2018.

Direct payments are not the only way for universities to contribute to the local communities. For example, Dartmouth pays property taxes for around half of their properties in Hanover, Johns Hopkins provides medical services to Baltimore residents at its hospital, and Cornell helps support the TCAT system and educational resources like the ScienceCenter. Additionally, universities make large local purchases for supplies and construction. However, direct contributions do help provide for many essential public services, especially in smaller college towns like Ithaca. The voluntary contributions made by Cornell are used by Ithaca to help fund public services such as emergency services and law enforcement as well as road repairs. Given the state of some of the roads in Ithaca and the understaffing of the police and fire departments in Ithaca, it's not hard to argue that more funding should be given to these essential public services - but should that money come from Cornell? 

In 2018, Ithaca Mayor Svante Myrick criticized Cornell's contribution to Ithaca as being too low, claiming that "Ithaca would be a better place to live if it were Harvard here instead of Cornell." Similarly to Cornell, Harvard makes voluntary contributions to Boston and Cambridge, although it is under a more structured program called PILOT (Payment in Lieu of Taxes). Under PILOT, universities in the Boston area are encouraged to contribute around 25% of what they would have paid in taxes had their property not been tax exempt. With around $1.5 billion of tax-exempt properties, Harvard contributed $3.2 million under the PILOT program in FY 2017.  Although the amount that Harvard pays to Boston is more than double the amount that Cornell pays to Ithaca, it is still dwarfed by the $48 million of property taxes that Harvard would have owed. The contribution of other schools on the PILOT program varied - Boston University paid $6 million, while other schools paid nothing. 

Cornell’s payment to Ithaca makes up a much larger proportion of the city’s budget than Harvard’s payment to Boston. Cornell’s $1.3 million payment accounts for roughly 1.7% of Ithaca’s $76 million budget for 2019. In contrast, all the schools in the PILOT program paid Boston a combined total of $13.9 million in 2018, which made up only 0.4% of Boston’s $3.2 billion budget. Harvard’s contributions to Boston are also less impressive considering their endowment - while they pay more than twice as much as Cornell pays Ithaca, their endowment is more than five times as large as ours (Harvard’s endowment is $38 billion vs Cornell’s $7 billion). 

To look at it from a different perspective, the amount that Cornell contributes directly to the city of Ithaca annually is less than the annual cost of maintaining Duffield Hall ($1.6 million). That said, regular costs like building maintenance or annual payments to Ithaca need to be funded by the endowment - Duffield Hall’s maintenance costs are covered by roughly $40 million of Cornell’s endowments, raised when the building was constructed. Paying an extra $1 million a year to Ithaca would require an extra $25 million endowment, assuming a 4% annual return. While $25 million does not seem like an unattainable amount compared to the donations that fund new buildings at Cornell, it would be difficult to convince donors that their money should be used to help pay the City of Ithaca, which would indirectly benefit students, instead of being used to support things that directly benefit students, such as educational programs or financial aid.

Regardless of what happens, it's important for Cornell to continue to have a dialogue with the City of Ithaca, to ensure that its contributions are being directed to areas that would make the most impact to quality of life for both students and residents of Ithaca.


