---
layout: post
title: "[Recipe] Yakisoba"
description: "Recipe for making yakisoba"
date: 2023-07-20
category: "Cooking"
---

Why the heck do you even have a yakisoba recipe - isn't it like ramen where you just follow the instructions on the package? I mean, yeah, if you only want noodles and sauce, I guess. If you want to know how to make a real meal out of it with meat and veggies, here's how I do it.

<!-- more -->

### Yakisoba
- Prep time: 5 minutes
- Cook time: 20 minutes

### Ingredients (serves 4)
- 1 lb thin sliced pork belly (should be cut similarly to bacon)
- 1 small head of green cabbage
- 1 pack of bean sprouts
- 3 packs of Maru-chan Nama Yakisoba
- salt
- pepper
- sesame seeds (optional)

### Directions
1. Wash the cabbage and bean sprouts
2. Cut the cabbage into thin strips, around 1/2"
3. Cut each slice of pork belly into 1-2" wide pieces, and season with salt and pepper
4. Heat some oil in a large pan and cook the pork belly until it just starts to brown. Don't overcook it - it shouldn't be crunchy like bacon.
5. Once the pork is cooked, set it aside.
6. Add 1/4 cup of water to the pan, and cook the cabbage and bean sprouts on medium heat for around 5 minutes. 
7. Once the veggies are cooked, set them aside.
8. Ensure that there is sufficient water in the pan and cook the noodles for 2-3 minutes with the lid on.
9. Break up the noodles with chopsticks, and turn off the stove.
10. Add all the ingredients back in the pan, add 2 dried sauce packets (or your favorite yakisoba sauce) and mix together until the sauce is liquid and evenly distributed.
