Recently, there has been a attention and discussion around Amazon's decision to cancel plans to build a second headquarters in NYC due to vehement local opposition. Much of the discussion centered on the benefits that Amazon would bring to the city, and how much a large employer should be expected to contribute to the city to help alleviate traffic congestion and create affordable housing. This contentious topic naturally parallels a debate surrounding Cornell's own role in the Ithaca community, and how Cornell's long-standing relationship with Ithaca has changed in modern history. 

In 1995, Cornell and Ithaca signed a memorandum of understanding, which stated that Cornell was important to Ithaca's growth and that the "vitality of Ithaca" was important for Cornell's mission. Today, the affairs of Cornell and Ithaca are more intertwined than ever. The current Mayor of Ithaca is a Cornell graduate, and with the ever-increasing cost of off-campus housing and the disrepair of some parts of collegetown, more students are experiencing the problems felt by Ithaca residents and joining in on the discussion. 

As Ithaca's largest employer, Cornell has undoubtedly contributed massively to the economic development of Ithaca. According to Carol Kammen,  "in 2001 Cornell University accounted for 23% of the economy in [Tompkins] county, and approx. 50% of the money that comes into the local economy from outside." As a non-profit, Cornell pays no property taxes (in contrast, Amazon is required to pay taxes, but would have received a $3 billion tax break for its new expansion). Instead, Cornell makes a voluntary annual contribution to Ithaca in addition to supporting the TCAT bus system and educational facilities such as the ScienceCenter. In total, Cornell owns around $2.1 billion in tax-exempt property in Ithaca and paid $1.3 million in voluntary contributions to Ithaca in FY 2018.

The voluntary contributions made by Cornell are used by Ithaca to fund public services such as emergency services and law enforcement as well as road repairs. Given the state of some of the roads in Ithaca and the perpetual understaffing of the police and fire departments in Ithaca, it's not hard to argue that more funding should be given to these essential public services. Yet, according to an article published in the Cornell Daily Sun in late 2018, Ithaca mayor Svante Myrick criticized Cornell's contribution to Ithaca as being too low, claiming that "Ithaca would be a better place to live if it were Harvard here instead of Cornell." 

Harvard contributes to Boston and Cambridge through a similar system of voluntary contributions called PILOT (Payment in Lieu of Taxes), where schools are encouraged to pay around. With around $1.5 billion of tax-exempt property, Harvard contributed $3.2 million under the PILOT program in FY 2017.  Although the amount that Harvard pays to Boston is more than double the amount that Cornell pays to Ithaca, it is still dwarfed by the $48 million of property taxes that Harvard would have owed annually had it not been tax-exempt. The contribution of other schools on the PILOT program varied - Boston University paid $6 million one year, while other schools paid nothing.

To look at things from a different perspective, the amount that Cornell contributes to Ithaca annually is less than the annual cost of operating and maintaining Duffield Hall ($1.6 million). The amount that Cornell contributes to Ithaca - less than the amount that it costs to maintain a single building on campus - is tiny compared to the massive physical and economic footprint of Cornell within the community. As an unscientific experiment, I asked a few of my friends for their best guesses of how much in direct payments Cornell gave to Ithaca annually - all but two of the guesses were higher than $10 million.

That said, it's important to realize that money doesn't grow on a tree, and most expenditures must be funded either through donations or through returns on the university's endowment. It's much harder to attract alumni donations to support the city of Ithaca than it is to attract donors for a new scholarship or a flashy new building on campus. That said, if there was enough support for it among donors, trustees, and administrators it would be entirely possible to scrounge up this sum by trimming costs elsewhere, reducing administrative bloat, or skimming surpluses from revenue-generating programs. Regardless of what happens, it's important for Cornell to continue its frank dialogue with Ithaca to determine how Cornell can better contribute to the surrounding community.


List of References:
1. Kammen, Carol. Cornell: Glorious to View (p. 211-212, 222).
2. Svante Myrick's comments: https://cornellsun.com/2018/10/14/ithaca-mayor-svante-myrick-says-cornell-should-pay-more-to-city/
3. Ronald G. Ehrenberg. Tuition Rising. (p. 104-105)
4. PILOT program https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2017/08/18/city-asks-for-payments-most-colleges-don-pay-full/KnZ5ZRx0QMhrB5FA6NJZxN/story.html
5. PILOT program statistics https://www.boston.gov/departments/assessing/payment-lieu-tax-pilot-program
