After writing out my thoughts on my trip to Paris recenty, I decided that I would aso do the same for the cruise I took this winter break. That trip was a 7-day cruise departing from Miami with stops in St. Maarten, Puerto Rico, and Haiti, and despite being sick for most of the time I still found the trip to be relaxing and thought-provoking, although for reasons I will outline later I probably would not recommend a trip like this to my friends.

For a frugal traveler like me, the level of wealth and excess I experienced on the cruise was staggering. The main promenade constantly featured luxury watches and jewelery for sale, and the same luxury goods were on sale at many of the tourist-oriented areas we stopped at. An uncountable number of diamond stores dotted the streets of St. Maarten, undoubtedly catered to passengers on the several cruise ships that stopped by every day. The shocking thing was that passengers actually bought these things - every sale would be swarmed with people browsing the goods, and on St. Maarten I saw a man buy a $20,000 rolex. We even had an art auction onboard, which I attended for the free champagne and because I had never been to an art auction before. It wasn't quite what I expected, since only about half of the items placed on the block received any bids and the majority of those were sold for the initial bid price, although one man did buy a painting for $40,000. It's incredibly hard for me (as a college student who grew up in a frugal, middle-class family) to understand the mindset of the ultra-rich and how they think it's ok to drop tens of thousands of dollars on a whim.

I was pleasantly surprised by the food and the service onboard the ship. Although my ticket wasn't anything special (the equivalent of flying economy I guess), the treatment I received was anything but economy-class. As a child I had read about the different passenger classes on the Titanic and the corned beef and cabbage served to second and third class passengers, so the fancy three-course meals I was served on this cruise were entirely unexpected, especially given my experience with airplane food. Additionally, the room steward and the waiters at dinner service were top notch - after I ordered hot tea a few times, one of the waiters would always bring a pot of hot tea with each meal without me asking. For me, experiencing the dedication and professionality of the crew was one of the high points of the cruise, and I made sure to tip generously - this was one expense that I had no qualms for, and besides, most of that tip money came out of my backjack winnings at the onboard casino.

The low point of my trip was probably when I tried a shore excursion on Haiti, a snorkeling trip in the coral reefs. The waters were clean and beatiful, and the corals almost touched the surface of the water in some places - so shallow that I had to adopt a planking position and let the current carry me over the top of some coral formations, since padding or kicking would have touched them. However, this was where the positives stopped. The coral had many dead patches, and the reefs were definitely not as vibrant as the ones I had seen on TV or in books. I also witnessed the physica destruction of the reef firsthand, as the 40 or so tourists bleeding sunscreen into the water and accidentally destroying coral were akin to a herd of buffalo trampling a flower garden. Several times I saw a snorkeler choke on water and flail desperately for a few seconds - then their foot would make contact with a coral formation as they tried to stand on the seafloor, and then I saw a cloud of dust and pieces of shattered coral sink to the bottom. This sight both shocked and saddened me, since I knew that I had just taken part in the type of tourism that destroyed natural environments. The environmental impacts of their activities is probaby unknown to most tourists (I doubt many people even think about this when they travel), so I think the blame for the damage caused by these activities lies mostly on the cruise line and the locals that agreed to offer this service. They could have chosen to not offer this excursion, or take tourists to a deeper part of the reef, but there was too much money to be made from advertising a trip where coral was less than an arm's length away.